So I wanted to welcome you all
to our last session of the day,
which is Advanced Enterprise Objects
Frameworks.
And we have Steve Minehr
here to present for you.
Steve?
Thank you, Toni.
So today's session is Advanced EOF.
My name is Steve Minehr.
I'm a Web Objects Engineer.
Helping with the demos
later will be Ben Trumbull,
another Web Objects Engineer.
So we'll bring him up a little bit later.
First, before we get started,
I'd like to know how many people attended
the Intro to EOF session on Tuesday?
I saw James Dempsey.
So he put on a great show.
I'm sorry I don't have
any musical ability.
No singing or dancing for you today.
But if you do come to
the beer bash tonight,
there'll be a band there.
So I hope that takes care
of the entertainment.
Can I also ask,
I wonder how many people here are
new to EF or new to WebObjects?
Okay, so there's a few.
How many people feel like
they're advanced users?
You prefer to edit your models
in Emacs because it's faster?
All right, good, good.
We got a couple.
All right,
so I'll try to give you something new.
A lot of this is going to be review of
things you picked up in other sessions.
But we'll try to leave time for
questions at the end because I have
a feeling most people come to these
sessions just to ask questions.
They don't really want the content.
Okay, so introduction,
we're going to talk about a
number of different topics in EOF.
We've already reviewed models
in this previous session.
I'm going to give you my spin
on a couple of little things.
We'll talk about designing EOs,
and I'll give you some
recommendations there.
I'm going to strongly recommend
you use single-table inheritance
when you're using inheritance.
We'll get to that.
Most of that was already
explained in the last session.
We'll do a quick bit on
shared editing contexts,
and we might get some
questions on that later.
I'm going to go over delegate methods,
but I don't have enough time,
and to tell you the truth,
I can't get into every single delegate,
so I'm going to give you my general spiel
on delegate methods and what to look for.
Then we'll get to data
synchronization and have a demo there.
That's an issue that affects some
large installations when you have
multiple WebObjects instances
or you have multiple writers,
and there's some
interesting issues there.
Finally, I'm going to talk about
the use of the EOF.
I'm going to talk about
Finally, if we have time,
we'll talk about raw rows
and using SQL within EOF.
Okay, before I get started into my talk,
I want to review last year's talk.
Eric Noyo gave a really good talk.
It had the same title, Advanced EOF.
I'm stealing only a couple of his slides.
You should go back and look at last
year's talk if you want to review.
Eric told us about his
bug tracker example.
And one of the big points he made
was the separation of the user
interface from the controller logic.
And he had a nice framework for
doing his controller and showing
you how you can change that to put
different UIs on the same application.
Eric also made a point of doing built-in
testing while you're developing.
This is one of the ideas
from extreme programming.
You might not be so extreme,
but it is a good idea to build some
tests into your components and into your
application as you're developing it.
Then you could feel adventurous,
make big changes, run your test,
make sure you didn't break anything else.
and Eric's example is
still available on the web,
so you can download
that and play with that.
Okay, the technology frameworks
that we deal with in EOF,
of course we start with Java Foundation.
That's all your base classes
and a lot of utility classes.
We build on that with Java EO Control.
That's where EO Editing Context
lives and Fetch Specifications.
That's where you're going to
do most of your programming
when you're dealing with EOF.
Java EO Access is our
database access layer.
For the most part, you don't need to know
how EO Access works,
but since you came to an advanced talk,
I'm going to talk about it.
And similarly, with our JDBC adapter,
at the API level, you shouldn't have the
program to the JDBC adapter.
We mention it just because that's the
main framework you want to include when
you're talking to relational databases,
and we add that automatically for you.
in Project Builder.
All right,
I stole this slide from another
talk because I thought it was a
pretty slide and I didn't have
any great graphics in mind.
EOF is that little part over the right.
Okay, most of this is other
stuff in WebObjects,
but the part on the right is the database
talking to your web application machines.
So here's another slide I just
stole from the previous talk.
But I'll take credit for this last year.
I designed this slide,
so I gave it to them.
The idea here is editing
context at the top.
That's where you're doing
most of your programming.
If you're new to EOF,
spend time looking at EO editing context.
Look at the API.
Make sure you understand how to add
objects to both sides of relationships.
There's plenty of API there.
It's not too complicated.
But that's where you want to
concentrate your time and effort.
All right?
I'm going to talk about
some other things.
I don't want to confuse new people,
but advanced people sometimes run
into issues where they have to dig
a little deeper into the EOF stack.
The object store coordinator is
a simple object that coordinates
multiple object stores.
And an object store is kind of an
abstract representation of some data
source out there in the real world.
Normally, your object store is going
to be an EO database context.
That's our object that knows
how to manage dealing with
any particular database.
and EODatabaseContext is a complicated
class with lots of delegates.
There's plenty of opportunities for
you to take control of EOF there.
Normally you don't have to,
but it's there if you need it.
EODatabase uses, I'm sorry,
EODatabaseContext uses an
EODatabase to store snapshots.
So that maintains the EOF's idea of
what data exists in the database.
We use those,
those are row level snapshots.
We use that for checking objects when
we're going in and out of the database.
When we're instantiating objects,
we're sharing that memory
that's stored in the snapshots.
The, at the intro course,
James mentioned that I talked
more about snapshots,
so I'll talk about it now because
I didn't have a slide for this.
But EOeditingContext
also keeps snapshots.
It keeps object level snapshots.
So you can imagine any EO can more or
less be translated in terms of storage.
It keeps the storage at
state into a dictionary.
So that's what a snapshot is.
It's just a dictionary
representation of the state of an EO.
And EOeditingContext will keep track
of that as you're changing EOs.
There's a last committed snapshot.
You can always take a current snapshot
of any EO and store that away.
The EODatabase keeps row level snapshots.
So again, it's a dictionary idea,
but their values in the
EODatabase correspond to the
columns in your database.
So it's a little bit different.
It's not necessarily your full EO.
And you might have
more information there.
The EODatabase snapshots, for example,
have primary key information,
whereas your EOs typically won't
have primary key information in your
snapshots at the editing context level.
The database channel controls the
interaction with the database,
issuing queries to the database.
And each of these database sorts
of objects has an adapter object
corresponding to it that it uses
to deal with a particular database.
In our case, we have a JDBC adapter,
so there's a JDBC adapter context
and there's a JDBC channel.
Those particular data sources
are the ones that are used
to deal with the EODatabase.
Those particular adapter level
classes know how to deal with
a particular data source.
So we're specialized for
JDBC with our JDBC channel.
The database channel object is
more abstract and it just uses the
adapter channel to get the job done.
And then below, of course,
there's a relational database.
All right, for model recommendations,
Justin talked about quite
a bit of this before,
so I'll go quickly.
In the primary key, it's simpler.
If you use a simple energy
as your primary key,
there was a question last
time about compound keys.
That's no problem,
but you have to do a little bit more
work if you have compound primary keys.
All your relationships are a
little bit more complicated.
That's fine.
Many DBAs will set up the
database for you that way.
Complicated models are natural.
If you have a big enterprise application.
But if you're in control and you're
designing the database from scratch
just for your WebObjects application,
I recommend that you keep it simple.
Use an integer as your primary key.
And usually,
you don't want to use that primary key
as a foreign key into another table.
If you're doing inheritance,
that's natural.
You have multiple tables.
They share the primary key.
You can take the primary key from
one table to get into the other.
But in the general case,
you'll want to have a separate attribute,
which is your foreign key,
into the other table.
That's going to make it more flexible
for you and will allow you to have
optional relationships where that
foreign key value might be null.
Whereas some people get into
trouble where they want to
make an optional relationship,
but they're joining
using the primary key,
which is identically the same as
the primary key in the other table.
And EOF will be confused by
that because any time you have
a value for a foreign key,
it expects to see another
row in the other table.
And if you don't actually
have that other row there,
you're going to get an error.
We were talking about class properties.
Justin mentioned to be
careful with large to many's.
You don't always have to model your
relationships as class properties.
You might have them in your model so
that you can form queries over them,
but you might not need those values
every time you instantiate Neo.
So the idea here is just a question
of performance and being pragmatic.
There may be cases where you don't need
that to many to be updated every time
you update the inverse relationship.
So leave it off,
don't turn it on as a class property.
When you need those values,
you can use a fetch spec.
You can fetch all those objects
across that relationship on demand.
This is a question of
how large the to many is.
Similarly, for, well, for another reason,
primary keys usually are not
marked as class properties.
You usually don't need to
manipulate the primary key.
But if you have some complicated
situation where your primary key
is not marked as class property,
you usually don't need to
manipulate the primary key.
But if you have some complicated
situation where your primary
key isn't a simple integer,
then you might want to
populate that yourself.
But of course,
once you have Neo constructed
with a primary key value,
you're not allowed to change that.
When you're modeling blobs,
the recommendation is to put
the blobs in a separate table.
And this, again,
was a question in the last session.
EOF is creating faults.
I'll talk about faults a little
bit more for you in a minute.
But a fault is basically an
empty shell of an object.
We'll fill that up later.
If your blobs are in your main
table and their class properties,
whenever EOF fetches that object,
it has to instantiate the blob in memory.
If it's in a separate table and
you use a relationship to the
other EO containing just the blob,
then that allows us to make that a fault.
And that can give you better performance
in the situation where you're not
necessarily touching all those blobs.
And as Justin mentioned,
you probably don't want to lock on blobs.
There's no SQL command for us to
do a comparison against the blob,
so we have to pull the
whole thing into memory,
compare it in memory,
and that's usually a performance killer.
When we're talking about
generating primary keys,
the adapter will automatically
generate primary keys for you
if they're simple integers.
If there's any other kind of primary key,
then you need to fill that in yourself.
And one way you can do that
is with the delegate method,
database context, new primary key.
You can implement that whenever EOF is
inserting an object in the database,
it will ask your delegate to give it,
fill out a value for the
primary key dictionary and
then use those values into the,
put those values into
the database for you.
Or if you mark your primary
key as a class property,
you can implement wake
from insertion on your EO,
fill in that value
whenever you insert an EO,
you'll be responsible for
giving it a unique primary key.
There's also one other way that
we can do it automatically,
it's not on the slide,
but if your primary key is an
NSData of exactly 24 bytes,
EOF has a magic way of coming up with a
globally unique value for those 25 bytes.
That's a little complicated,
but if you want to use it, go ahead.
All right, when you're designing EOs,
the first thing, of course,
you have to take a look at the
EO Enterprise Object Interface.
But for most people,
you don't want to just implement
that interface yourself.
You want to use one of our base classes.
First base class is EO Custom Object.
That's your basic EO.
It knows how to do
everything with faults.
And again,
let me review faults while we're here.
A fault is an empty shell of an EO.
The reason we create faults is when
we're fetching the first EO and
it has relationships to other EOs,
you can imagine a long
chain of relationships.
We're pulling in one EO.
We don't want to pull in the
whole database or follow that
long chain on the first fetch.
So EOF creates an empty shell,
a placeholder, for that object.
And when your code is
going to touch that object,
EOF will populate it.
Now, the situation can be more
complicated with batch faulting.
We can actually populate multiple objects
at the same time when you fire one fault.
We'll fill a few more of them,
so that can help you with performance and
improve the locality of reference there.
But the key thing on faults is
that in your getter methods,
you need to call will read.
If you're implementing EO custom object,
it's a very easy requirement,
but just remember this.
In all your getter methods,
call will read first.
That gives the framework a
chance to populate the fault,
create a real EO, so that everything
else will work for you.
Another requirement is
in your setting methods,
your setters have to call will change.
Will change will call will read,
so that takes care of
the faulting part of it.
And then will change also
allows the framework to keep
track of EOs that have changed.
And then as we mentioned
in all the other sessions,
EOF is keeping track of
all those changed objects,
and later when you save changes,
we know which ones to send
back to the database for you.
Now if you don't want to write any code,
you can use EOGenericRecord.
And so you can think of this as
your EO with values and keys in it.
So it's your, it's the simplest way
to do your programs.
It's a great way to get started and
EOModeler will use EOGenericRecord
if it can't find your class or you
don't specify a class in your EOModel.
There's no code required.
We do automatic storage.
It's actually a tiny bit faster in
that we're controlling all the storage.
The key value coding
runs a little faster.
Another nice feature
is EOGENERIC_RECORD can
do deferred faulting.
So I just talked about normal faulting
where we create a shell of an object,
we'll fill it in later.
Deferred faulting doesn't even
allocate the memory for the object yet.
It's deferring even creating the fault.
We have a special unique
placeholder object.
And because this is all
happening within our framework,
we can take care of creating
the fault and creating the real
object when it's actually needed.
So you can save a little bit of
memory with deferred faulting.
If you want,
your EOCustom objects can also
implement deferred faulting.
That's another interface.
You'll need to call one extra method
in your accessor methods to make sure
that deferred faulting is working.
So it's really simpler probably
to use EOGENERIC_RECORD.
You can subclass EOGENERIC_RECORD and
when EOModeler creates a Java class
for you by our templates,
we're creating a subclass
of EOGENERIC_RECORD.
You can add IVARs there
and do whatever you want.
And you'll see how the
EOGENERIC_RECORD accesses
values using the stored value
accessors a little bit later.
All right,
last part of designing your EOs.
You want to keep your EO code clean.
This is really just a basic
object-oriented programming
principle of encapsulation.
Don't put more code in your
EOs than they need to know about.
Make sure you just use
Java Foundation and EO control
concepts in your EOs.
You shouldn't be using EO access.
Maybe you might want to use EO utilities.
That's kind of a special
area of EO access.
It's, um, some convenience, uh,
functionality there for, um...
[Transcript missing]
All right, key value coding.
Probably you've dealt with key
value coding if you've done any
work in WebObjects Builder or
any EOF applications before.
The interfaces for key value coding
are spread across four different
interfaces there that I've listed.
The basics are pretty simple.
If you want to, you can override it.
We don't recommend you do,
but it's all there if you
want to take control yourself.
I would suggest take a look at the inner
classes of each of those interfaces.
It has an inner class called
utility and default implementation.
The utility has static methods
that if you're taking control,
you can invoke these static
methods on any object.
We'll check to make sure
we do the right thing.
And the default implementation has
our performance optimizations in it.
So even if you're doing something fancy,
try to call back into our
default implementation.
But for most users, you don't need to
change key value coding.
You're just going to be using it.
So the basics,
access to your object by key
is to call value for key.
So on any EO, if you know your
different attribute names,
you can get the value by
calling value for key.
Take value for key is
for setting a value.
And we'll explain exactly how
those methods work in a minute.
Value for key paths and take value
for key paths is just an extension.
Instead of having a simple key,
you can have a key path,
which is a chain of keys.
So you can be following a relationship,
and that's the notation for that is just
a string with a key separated by dots.
One interesting item is that
NSDictionary implements key value coding.
So you can see the
correspondence between snapshots,
which are NSDictionary's,
and EOs allow you to kind of mix and
match values out of EOs and dictionaries.
NSArray is special and to many
relationships are implemented
with NSMutable arrays.
They have special keys that they
understand these at sign operators.
At sign count gives you
the count of the array.
The other operators, min, max, sum,
and average,
all take another key after them.
So you're using a key
path and you might say,
give me the average of a particular key
in all these EOs that were in an array.
and we'll return that single value.
The stored value accessors,
these are the more primitive
way of getting access to EOs.
And these methods are mainly used
by our framework in order to,
say, populate EOs,
take stored value for key.
When we're fetching the raw
data out of the database,
the framework is going to
invoke take stored value for
key to populate your EO object.
So we're trying to do it in the
most primitive way possible.
We'll talk about the difference
between the stored value and the take,
and the regular value
for key in a minute.
Values for keys and take values from
dictionary are methods that let you slice
and dice between dictionaries and EOs.
So you can update your EOs from
a dictionary or you can
pull out just pieces of your
dictionary by using values,
pieces of your EO by
using values for keys.
And then these last two static
methods you can implement on your
EO class and it controls how this,
how we do our key value coding.
First of all,
whether or not we can access
your member fields directly,
usually that's true and we'll
use your IVARs directly,
but you can set that to false if you
don't want key value coding to look
into your EOs and hit the IVARs.
And the other option is
should use stored accessors,
and that controls whether or not
we're going to do anything special
on the stored value accessor methods.
We'll talk about that in a minute.
So we're going to do a little bit
of a quick review of the EO class.
We're going to talk about the EO class,
and then we're going to
talk about the EO class.
And then we're going to
And then we're We'll talk
about that in a second.
So quickly, value for key,
that's the main way that you're going
to access values out of your EOs.
We have to look up a method,
figure out how to get
that value out of your EO.
And the way we do that is looking
for the public method first.
If we can't find a public method,
then we're going to look
for an underbar method.
And the convention is the underbar
method is maybe a little bit
more private or more direct.
And finally, if there's no method
matching that key name,
we'll look for a field
matching the key name.
And so you can see the whole list
of things we'll look at there.
Stored Value for Key just changes
the order that we're going to
look for a way to access your EO.
And as we said before, the stored
The stored value methods are trying
to get to the more primitive values,
bypassing some of your code maybe.
You might have your public
method implement something a
little more complicated than
your underbar primitive method.
So you can take advantage
of this when you're coding.
If you have to do something complicated,
put your public API that you
want other users to invoke
in your regular get method,
and then maybe have an underbar
get name that does something a
little more direct to your EO.
And of course, we'll hit the fields,
and finally,
if there's no underbar or field,
we'll call your public method.
Take value for key.
This is how we're setting things,
so we're looking for the set methods.
If we don't find a method,
we'll look for the underbar,
and finally we'll hit the field directly.
And when we're doing
the take stored value,
we just change that order.
We're hitting the primitive
underbar method first,
otherwise the field,
and then the public method.
So you don't have to do anything fancy,
but if you do have a complicated EO and
there's some subtlety to how you want
that EO populated versus how you want
the rest of the world to access the EO,
you can take advantage of
following this convention.
and its validation is our interface
declaring how we validate EOs.
We don't want you to put the
validation code in the setter methods.
We want you to write a separate
method on a particular key.
You can call our method
validate value for key.
We'll call your custom validate key.
So we'll show you in a second
an implementation of that.
Again, you can override and do something
different in validation.
Take a look at the interclass utility
so you can invoke this on any object.
And also take a look at
our default implementation.
Normally you don't want to override this,
but it's there if you want to.
Here's a validation example.
If you have a key name,
then you might write a method.
In this case, we're taking a string
and returning a string.
If something goes wrong,
then we want to throw an exception.
And our framework is
looking for that exception.
It's an NSValidation
validation exception.
In this case, it's very simple.
We're just saying we want the length
of the name to be greater than four.
We'll throw if it's not.
Otherwise, we'll just return the name.
But you might do something
more sophisticated.
All right, you can also do EO validation.
These validation methods
are sent to your EO,
and you can validate the entire EO,
not just an individual key
or attribute on that EO.
So,
the names are kind of self-explanatory.
When your EO is first being
inserted in an editing context,
we'll call validate for insert.
When you're updating that EO,
we can call validate for update.
When we're saving changes,
we'll call validate for save.
And finally, if you delete the EO,
we'll call validate for delete.
So, you can put extra business
logic in any of these methods.
A few other methods that you
might consider implementing on
your EO to handle unknown keys.
These are really error handling.
There's an interface
called error handling.
Handle query with unbound key.
So if you send your EO some
key it doesn't know about,
if you implement this method,
we'll call this method and give
you a chance to recover from
that or do something special.
And similarly for handle
take value for unbound key.
Unable to set null for key.
Some attributes don't allow null.
You want to maybe substitute a
zero or some other special value.
You can do that using this method.
Awake from insertion.
Whenever you're inserted into the EO,
I'm sorry, whenever you're inserted
into the EO editing context,
your EO will get called with this method,
awake from insertion.
If you're populating
your own primary keys,
that's a good place to do it.
When the EO is fetched
out of the database,
it will be sent the
message awake from fetch.
So you can do some special
processing there to fix up your EO.
Okay, the following methods are things
that you want to invoke but
you don't want to override.
These are all things used by the
framework and we give you a good
implementation and I don't think
anything good can happen if you
override any of these methods.
So,
will change notifies the editing context
that you're changing this object.
Do that in your setter methods.
Will read in your getter methods.
Will read relationship if you're
implementing deferred faulting,
you'll need to invoke this.
Again,
if you're doing an eogeneric record,
you don't even have to worry about
invoking any of these methods
because we'll invoke those for you.
Then the stored value access,
stored value for key and take
stored value for key are kind of
private to our implementation.
We'll invoke those at the right time.
You can invoke those if you're
subclassing eogeneric record,
but I don't think you
should ever override those.
Okay, we'll switch gears a little
bit and talk about inheritance.
This was covered in the last session,
so this is a bit of review.
But vertical inheritance is
nice because it's natural for
object-oriented programming.
It's simple maintenance.
You can add an attribute at any
parent entity and all the other
entities will inherit that attribute.
You don't have to do much maintenance
on your database table because
there's only one table where
you have to add another column.
But the fetches are expensive because
we have to do joins and we have
to do multiple fetches to do deep
inheritance fetching because we have
to fetch once for every sub-entity.
Horizontal inheritance,
where you duplicate the column
names in different tables,
is a bit more efficient in that
we don't have to join when we're
doing fetches for the simple case.
But there's still more
maintenance overhead.
If you want to update your
database or your object model
and add another attribute,
you have to remember to go put that
attribute in all the subentities
that inherit from the same parent.
So the recommendation is to
use single table inheritance.
In single table inheritance,
your columns are the union of all the
columns needed by all your subentities.
Each subentity might map a
different set of those columns.
The downside is you have to
allow null in anything that's not
common to all the subentities.
We'll have to insert a null in
those columns that aren't used
by a particular subentity row.
The big advantage is we can do a
single fetch for deep inheritance.
So we only have to issue one select,
get all the values out of the table,
and then we can assemble those into
the correct kind of subentity class.
And this also avoids a
limitation on sorting.
When you're doing horizontal
inheritance and you're trying to sort,
we're actually issuing multiple
select statements to the database.
Each of those is sorted,
but you don't have an
overall sorted result.
So that's a little bit of a
problem in horizontal inheritance.
Single table inheritance, of course,
since we're doing one select,
you'll get the natural result back.
Then you remember this
from the previous slides.
The idea here is that
everybody's sitting in one table.
I'm sorry,
that was from the previous session.
Now, we say we can do single table
inheritance fetching in one select,
but that's only if you meet a few
restrictions on how you set up
your single table inheritance.
First requirement is that you
have some attribute that's
distinguished to determine what
sub-edit this particular row is.
And the simplest way to do that
is to just have a subtype column,
maybe have different constants
assigned for each sub-edity.
Sub-edity one has a one in that column,
two, and so on.
And you write a restricting qualifier,
which is of the form attribute
equals some constant value.
Okay, this, if you follow these two
simple requirements,
then EOF can do a single fetch and
[Transcript missing]
All right,
so if you're trying to-- if you're
implementing single table inheritance,
typically you'll have to
implement a wake from insertion.
Whenever you create a
new instance of your EO,
you'll want to set this column.
So if the attribute was called sub,
you have a method called setSub,
and then each unique sub entity--
each sub entity has a unique
implementation of mySub that
just returns that constant value.
and once you've set the value for
the determinant of the subentity,
you shouldn't change it.
That's almost like a primary key.
It's write once.
All right, new topic,
shared editing context.
I don't have a lot to say
about shared editing context.
It was touched on in
the previous session.
In your EO model, you can designate fetch
specifications that will fetch
objects whenever we load this model
into the shared editing context.
So the shared editing context
is some common space that your
other editing contexts kind of
get to hold onto by default.
And the idea here is you might
fetch these things once it's
started up of your application.
You never have to fetch them again.
Everybody can see those EOs.
Maybe you have a catalog application,
some other kind of mostly
read-only permanent data.
Put it in your shared editing context.
But there's a requirement that other
editing contexts can have relationships
that point into your shared set of EOs,
but none of the shared EOs can point
out to the other editing contexts.
While we're here,
I should also point out that we are
aware of a bug that is causing some
kind of deadlocking issue when people
are using shared editing contexts.
So we're working on that.
We have our top people on that.
And I don't know exactly
when it will be fixed,
but just to be aware of that,
we'll get on it.
Delegate Methods.
So, EOF is very customizable.
There are lots of places
you can implement delegates,
but
New users probably don't want
to look at delegates first.
This is what you look at
when you can't figure out why
isn't EOF doing what I want.
There must be a better way.
There probably is if you go
take control and use a delegate.
But when you implement a delegate,
remember you're kind of doing
brain surgery on the EOF stack,
so you have a lot of responsibility to do
the right thing in your delegate method.
And your delegate methods then
get invoked possibly fairly often,
so you want to make sure it's efficient.
In the EO Control Layer,
take a look at EO Editing Context.
There's a few delegates there
controlling how updates are merged.
And each of these classes on the list
here has an inner class called Delegate.
So you can explore that in our API,
our Java documentation,
and see what other
delegates are available.
EO Database Context has
quite a few delegates.
You can control a lot of what EO Database
Context is doing in terms of fetching
and dealing with the database there.
EO Adapter Context also
has some delegates that
you might be interested in.
All these classes in the EO Access layer,
though, are a little difficult for your
application to get a hold of.
They're created on demand when you
first start doing something that
requires you to go to the database.
You usually have easy access
to your editing context.
Your session has a
default editing context,
or you've created it yourself.
But you don't really have direct
access to your database context,
your EO database context,
or these other things that
we're creating on demand.
So there's a static method in each of
these classes called setDefaultDelegate.
This lets you start your application
early on in your application.
You can call setDefaultDelegate.
Whenever EO database context
or any of these other things
are created after that point,
it will automatically be
assigned the delegate you wanted.
So this gives you a way to
kind of preload your delegates.
It makes it much easier than
trying to reach into the
stack and setting a delegate.
Data synchronization.
So this is an issue that comes up
especially in large deployments.
First thing to remember
is EOF is a big cache.
So we fetched values out of the database.
We checked when we're writing
back that values haven't changed.
But sometimes if you have multiple
WebObjects application instances,
you might have multiple writers or
you might even have external writers,
some other application that
has access to your database.
And the values have changed
out from underneath your EO.
Then when we try to do an update
and write to the database,
we're comparing against the old values.
EOF will notice that
something has changed,
which means you have stale data,
and will throw an exception,
and you'll get an optimistic
locking exception.
So, that's an issue that
requires some coding.
Let's talk about what's happening at UF.
This graphic again shows
you on the right hand side,
you can see you have multiple web optics,
application instances.
They may be talking
to multiple databases,
but the important thing is each
WOAP might have a slightly different
view of the data because of updates
and the time that things were fetched.
And if we have an
optimistic locking failure,
we'll have to do something about it.
So, what are the approaches to handling
optimistic locking failure?
Well, the first thing, of course,
do nothing.
We've conveniently implemented
that for you in the framework.
Okay.
We do nothing.
It's a little bit complicated.
It is application-specific
about how to handle that.
But for a lot of applications,
you're mostly read-only,
so this issue doesn't come up.
In many other applications,
even though you're writing
data to the database,
it's partitioned data.
Another user doesn't necessarily have
to see the data that's being written.
So again, in those kind of situations,
you don't have to worry about this.
But if you're in a real
concurrent situation,
you have multiple writers,
then you have to do something.
So there's two ideas.
One is try to avoid the
optimistic locking failure.
And the other thing to
do is to recover from it.
And if you want a robust application,
maybe you want
Let's talk about avoidance.
So the issue here is just,
sometimes it's just a matter
of freshness of your data.
EOF is trying to cache data,
so maybe you fetched something a long
time ago and you wanted to update it and
get the latest data from the database.
One way to do that is to refault objects.
So you can tell your editing
context to refault objects for you.
The editing context also has
a notion of a fetch timestamp.
Fetch timestamp is the editing context
request for freshness of the data.
So when any context is
first built by default,
it will accept data from this
object store that I think
the default is one hour old.
And that's reasonable for
a lot of applications.
You might want to change that to you
only want data that's one minute old.
That's acceptable, or even less.
But the tighter you set
the fetch timestamp,
the more fetching you'll have to do.
So you have to think about that a bit.
When you're fetching objects
on your fetch specifications,
as was shown in the last session,
you can set refreshes, refetched objects,
which usually I can't say in one go.
You can set that so that...
[Transcript missing]
But it is useful if you know there
are triggers out in the database or
something else strange has happened.
So that's your best efforts if
you're trying to avoid changes.
You can also use Dave Newman's
Change Notification Framework.
So this is not something
we ship with WebObjects,
but Dave Newman from Apple has made
this available to a number of people.
Wirehose recently shipped,
and they have an improved version of
it that is available for download.
The idea here is that you want
to notify your other WO apps that
you've made changes in one WO app.
You send those changes to the other
WO apps so that they try to keep in sync.
So this has been used in
several customer applications,
and people are pretty happy with it.
So you can check that out.
Download it from wirehose.com.
Okay, finally,
you may have tried to avoid
optimistic locking failure,
but somebody else got in there,
changed the data.
Now you want to recover from it.
All right, so you need to catch this
EO General Adapter exception.
Then you're going to have to drill down
a bit and investigate what happened.
Take a look at the user info.
There are a number of constants
defined in EO Adapter Channel.
First,
there's the look at adapter failure key.
Check that it's equal to the
adapter optimistic locking failure.
Then you'll have another key,
failed adapter operator key.
Take a look at that in
the user dictionary,
and there'll be all kinds of
information about what went wrong,
what your snapshots were,
what EO you were dealing with,
and you'll have a chance to recover.
Now, that doesn't help you so much,
but we have a demo coming up.
I'd like to invite
Ben Trumbull to come up.
So Ben has implemented this,
and he'll show you how to recover.
So basically what happened is
I'm sort of simulating another
user or database administrator
just whacking on your table.
So there's a background
process that's going,
and it's just picking random rows out
of a table and just changing them.
So that's going to cause some problems,
as you might imagine.
The big thing that you need to do is...
As we come in here,
Steve was talking about this general
adapter exception that you need to catch.
And you need to take a look at
this key and check to see if it's
an optimistic locking failure.
And then I just sort of isolated
the exact code down in here.
It's a little bit more than you
might need so I can show you exactly
what happened so I can make you
believe that I actually did something.
Otherwise, the save just goes through.
So, let's see
We get the operation type,
which is going to be an
integer and their constants,
and we're going to do a
switch down here on which one.
And we get the adapter operation
and the database operation.
And then from the database operation,
we find out what EO failed.
And from the adapter operation,
we find out what changes we were
trying to make when we saved.
And we also get a hold of the
database snapshot and stuff so we
can show that in our success page.
Then we switch on this.
This app's pretty simple,
and all it does is doing updates.
So we ignore deletes,
and we don't do any explicit locking.
So we kind of gloss over that.
As Steve mentioned,
this is application-specific.
There isn't any right answer.
So what I've done here is implemented
a last right wins behavior.
And that may or may not be what you want.
In fact, as I'll show you in the demo,
it produces some behavior you
might consider odd depending
on who you want to be right,
whether or not you want the first guy
to be right or the last guy to be right.
And basically we refault the object,
and then we reapply the
changes dictionary we got
out of the adapter operation,
and then we try to save again.
Unfortunately,
you're only going to get one exception.
So if you do a save and you save,
you know, 20 EOs,
or actually in this example we
saved about 14 rows all at once.
and three or four of
them have been changed.
You're going to get an
exception one at a time.
That's just the way the EO database
context goes through and performs
each adapter for each global ID.
So you could expect to possibly
have to catch a number of these,
which is why we've put
this in a while loop.
And we keep saving until we either
get an adapter exception that's
not an optimist clocking failure,
in which case we don't really
know what to do with it,
or we get something else,
which is probably a more
catastrophic failure.
Maybe you ran out of memory.
There's a no pointer exception somewhere
there shouldn't be that point for.
So we'll launch this up.
There's a quick little page.
It's using the real estate framework.
It's been demoed a few
times over the conference.
And basically there is an agent who's
looking through a number of listings,
and he's only showing the
things he really cares about,
which is the listing name,
what the asking price is,
and how much commission he
can expect to get out of that.
And if the housing market has gone up,
it's
In the last few months,
you probably want to change
all of these all at once,
unless something specific.
So...
We'll take a little look at what
this background process is doing.
It's made some changes.
[Transcript missing]
From our code,
we got the adapter operation,
we got what was in the database,
we got the
What's currently in the database
now-- and this is our cached
value here-- and then here is the
change that we wanted to make.
and we had two separate conflicts,
so they got involved in the loop.
come back.
And then, so this is the last write wins
behavior that I was talking about that
could be considered a little weird,
is that basically
everything's been written out,
sorry,
Everything's been written out
according to what this particular
editing context viewed the world as.
And despite the fact that a number of
other rows have been changed to 1,000,
and that we were setting inflation
in this particular example to 3%,
it took the previous value and
incremented it 3%, as opposed to
taking what was in the database,
you know, somebody else changed the
value for that listing,
and then applying a 3% to that,
incrementing that.
So, you know,
it's pretty application-specific
how you want to do that.
And, uh...
That's pretty much it.
I'm just using generic records here,
so I haven't done anything useful.
I put my UI code here in
these component classes,
and that's all there is.
Okay.
Thank you.
Okay, can we switch back to slides?
Thanks.
So, Ben made that look pretty simple.
And once you have it working,
I guess it is pretty simple.
But for a lot of EOF users
and Web Objects users,
this kind of problem has
troubled them for a long time.
So we're going to make that code
available in some generic way that would
make everything from WWDC available.
So you can download that
and take a look later.
Thanks, Ben.
All right.
We just have a few more slides left.
I want to talk about raw rows,
and this was touched
on in the last session.
You can certainly fetch raw rows,
which are just dictionaries
of keys and values,
in any of your fetch specifications.
The reason for doing that might be
because you don't need a full EO or maybe
you have a very large data set and you
just want some of that information back.
As long as you fetch primary key as part
of that raw row or somehow manipulate a
dictionary to add a primary key to it,
then we can always turn that into a
fault or a fault is a shell of an EO.
We can turn it back into an EO because
you can invoke a fault for a raw row.
And then one trick,
you might want to look at our
Think Movies example where we have
a component that declares a local
variable as NSKeyValueCoding.
So if you remember,
anything that implements key
value coding knows how to
take values and return values.
And typically all your WebObjects
components are just using
key paths to access values.
So dictionaries will work for that
just as well as full-fledged EOs.
You just have to make sure that your
dictionaries support all the keys
that are required in that component.
So by using a local variable
of NSKeyValueCoding,
you can use that component to
display both EOs and raw rows.
So when we're talking about EOF,
we always say the great feature
is you don't have to know SQL.
You don't have to write any SQL.
EOF will do it all for you.
And that's true,
and that is a big benefit.
It simplifies your
interaction with the database.
You spend most of your time modeling,
and then you can work on your custom
web applications without worrying too
much about how to talk to the database.
But there are times when you know
something about SQL or you want to take
advantage of some special feature in SQL,
special things that
aren't so object-oriented.
You might have a
complicated SQL expression,
or you might have a faster
SQL expression than we generate for
one of our fetch specifications.
In any fetch spec,
you can add a hint where you
can put your own custom SQL.
All right,
so you can find out what SQL we
generate and look in your modeler
and then decide to change the SQL,
do your own thing.
So you just have to be careful.
Make sure you return the values in
the same order that the original fetch
specification was going to return values.
You can also use custom SQL expressions
in any attribute definition.
So if you need access, say,
to some SQL function,
you don't want to compute it in memory,
but you just want to fetch the right
value when you're populating your EO,
as we mentioned in the previous session,
you can set a definition
on your attribute.
Then for any EO entity,
you can specify an external query.
Again,
you can use your own custom SQL there.
EO Utilities has several utility methods.
One is called Raw Rows for SQL,
and there's also a way to turn
those raw rows back into EOs.
EOadapter channel has
evaluate expression.
So every EOadapter is going to implement
some way to evaluate expressions,
and you can make direct use
of this if you want to send
your own SQL to a database.
And we'll show you that in
just a second in the next demo.
And if you want to write
your own custom EOQualifier,
EOQualifiers live in EO control.
So you can define in EO control
how-- some new qualifier you want
to use in your fetch specifications.
You define how it works in memory.
Then you implement another
interface that lives in EO access,
the EO SQL generation interface
for that particular qualifier.
You generate the SQL,
and we'll use that whenever we're
evaluating that query or using that
qualifier in a fetch specification.
So you can go ahead and
augment what we're doing.
All right.
We'll do another demo.
This time it's going to be for me.
Can we switch back to demo one?
Thanks.
All right,
we just have a couple of minutes.
This demo is not nearly as exciting.
So we have a project here that
is just a command line tool
for doing a SQL command line.
And this is more of something that's
kind of cool that you can do it,
not that it's something you want to do.
You don't, you don't, by any means,
you don't need to send your
own SQL in your applications,
but just to show you that it's all there.
So I wanted to show you how we fetch.
Okay, so the code is pretty
simple here to fetch.
I'll show you an operation in a second.
But the basic idea is that
once you find an entity,
you can ask that entity for
fetch specification by the name
that was given in this example.
Then we can do a fetch specification
with qualifier bindings,
all right, and I'm holding the bindings
in another dictionary.
So that gives me a fetch
spec that's ready to execute.
Come down here.
We're making a new editing context.
We're sending that editing
context and message objects with
fetch specification and the fetch
spec that we just built above.
And we pulled that fetch
spec out of the model.
Right,
we asked the entity for the fetch spec.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so the most important part is down
here when we're dealing with models.
We want to add the model
to our model group.
We create a new adapter
with adapter with model,
alright?
And from that adapter we can
create an adapter context.
The adapter context manages the
connection and we can create an adapter
channel which allows us to send queries.
Steve Mineur, Ben Trumbull Okay.
What's the wrong one?
You know, I'm trying to find my...
So this is the SQL tool running.
Make that bigger and I have a
couple of queries to show you.
So the typical query we've seen in
some other sessions here is finding a
listing in the real estate database with,
say, at least four bedrooms.
Okay.
And since I wrote this tool myself,
I'm getting back raw rows,
and I'm showing you kind of a dictionary
representation of the results.
With a little more effort,
we could show that in a table instead.
But this is just to show
you I can execute SQL.
My SQL tool just read this string,
sent it to the adapter channel,
and got back some results.
This tool here also has
a concept of logging.
There's a helpful setting called
EOAdapterDebugEnabled that
you can turn on to see your
application generating SQL.
It does more logging of all the SQL calls
and the interactions with the database.
So I just asked for that to be turned on.
And now I have a command line.
Thank you for joining us.
I'm going to start with the
first part of the session,
which is to talk about the model.
I think I spelled something wrong.
All right,
I think I'm gonna run out of time here,
so I better take the questions then.
I'm sorry, I got the wrong model.
But I'll put this code out on the web,
too, or wherever we put the WWDC code.
And you can take a look at it,
but this is just to show
you that you can fetch SQL,
and you can use the adapter
debug enabled and logging to
see what SQL we're generating.
And sometimes it helps even
debug your own code in that
you may have a typo somewhere,
like this time.
You may have an incorrectly
defined attribute,
and that causes your SQL to look strange.
So, all right, thank you very much.
I think we'll go back to the slides,
please.
So in summary,
well I think you've heard everything.
We're running low on time so
I'm going to skip the summary
and go through the final slides.
The beta, the lab, open tomorrow.
There's nowhere else to go except
for the feedback session so you
can bring more questions there.
Contact those people, more information.
All our documentation,
I think you've seen this before.